src/content/post/geospecify/index.md, before:

---
title: "My Journey with GeoSpecify: A Personal Reflection"
description: "Insights and experiences from my role in the GeoSpecify initiative."
publishDate: "24 November 2024"
updatedDate: "24 November 2024"
tags: ["specify", "geoscience"]
draft: true
---

As the point of contact for the Specify team in the GeoSpecify initiative, I’ve had the unique opportunity to engage with a vibrant community of geologists, curators, and researchers from around the world. This experience has been enlightening, challenging, and rewarding, allowing me to play a major role in a project aiming to extend the existing Specify platform to support geoscience collections.

## Project Overview

**Duration:** January 2023 - Q1 2025

### Phases of the Project

#### Phase 1 (Complete)**

The first phase involved gathering use cases, information models, and best practices. [Ben Norton](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5819-9134), who has extensive experience working with Specify as well as being a data scientist and curation specialist, spearheaded this effort.

I had the privilege of conducting interviews with geological curators and researchers, which provided invaluable insights into the challenges and needs of the community. This foundational work was crucial in shaping our approach.

#### Phase 2 (In Progress)

Currently, we are focused on the design and software engineering for GeoSpecify, with an exciting goal of releasing a production-ready version by Q1 2025. This phase has been particularly stimulating, as I’ve been involved in translating the insights from our initial phase into practical software solutions.

## Engaging with Field Experts

Throughout 2023 and early 2024, I connected with a diverse range of scientists and collections personnel from institutions globally. These interactions, both virtual and in-person, were incredibly enriching. I learned firsthand how different institutions manage their specimens and data, and their feedback has been instrumental in refining our models.

### Notable Institutions I Engaged With

- Mindat.org
- The University of Kansas
- Denver Museum of Nature and Science
- South Dakota School of Mines
- University of Texas at Austin
- California Academy of Sciences
- Natural History Museum Bern
- Smithsonian Institution
- ...and many others.

These meetings not only broadened my understanding of geological collections but also fostered a sense of community among professionals dedicated to advancing this field.

## The GeoSpecify Advisory Committee

To ensure we stay aligned with the needs of our users, we established the GeoSpecify Advisory Committee, comprising 40 experts from over 30 collections. This committee has been a vital resource, providing guidance and feedback throughout our journey.

### Key Topics Discussed

- **Introduction to GeoSpecify**
- **Unique Identifiers**
- **Geologic Age**
- **Using GeoSpecify**

These discussions have been enlightening, offering diverse perspectives that have shaped our project's direction.

## Insights on the Extended Data Model

One of the highlights of my involvement has been the development of an extended data model that supports enhanced age queries. This feature is crucial for geologists, allowing them to search for specimens based on relative and absolute ages. 

### Why Extended Age Queries Matter

The ability to query geological time periods using chronostrat names or numbers across various contexts significantly enhances usability. I’ve seen how this functionality can streamline searches and enrich the data available for geological research, making it easier for researchers to find relevant specimens.

In conclusion, my experience with the GeoSpecify initiative has been transformative. I’ve gained a deeper appreciation for the complexities of managing geological collections and the importance of collaboration in advancing our understanding of the geosciences. As we move towards our production release, I am excited about the impact this project will have on the community and look forward to continuing this journey.

For more detailed insights, check out our publication, **Extending Specify 7 for Geoscience Collections**, which outlines our efforts in depth and can be accessed [here](https://doi.org/10.3897/biss.8.141673).

Commit message:

Add more to the GeoSpecify reflection

src/content/post/geospecify/index.md, after:

---
title: "My Journey with GeoSpecify: A Personal Reflection"
description: "Insights and experiences from my role in the GeoSpecify initiative."
publishDate: "24 November 2024"
updatedDate: "24 November 2024"
tags: ["specify", "geoscience"]
draft: true
---

As the point of contact for the Specify team in the GeoSpecify initiative, I’ve had the unique opportunity to engage with a vibrant community of geologists, curators, and researchers from around the world. This experience has been enlightening, challenging, and rewarding, allowing me to play a major role in a project aiming to extend the existing Specify platform to support geoscience collections.

In early 2023 I was asked by the then director of the Specify Collections Consoritum, Jim Beach, to play a role in the GeoSpecify initiative as a lead for the KU side of the project. I very excited for the opportunity, but equal parts intimidated to play such an important part in this kind of groundbreaking effort. I understood that the success of this project would not only impact my daily obligations but also countless individuals and organizations relying on the data model and application we develop. It felt like a massive weight was on my shoulders, but I could not have been more excited.

At that time, I was still a student navigating my final year of undergraduate studies in Business Administration. The idea of leading such a significant project made me question my abilities. I often wondered if I was truly qualified to contribute meaningfully to an initiative of this scale. The stakes were high, and the responsibility felt immense. I understood that my decisions could influence the project's direction and, ultimately, the success of our entire consortium. Balancing my academic commitments with the demands of this role was daunting, leaving me with a mix of excitement and anxiety. Fortunately, I had a supportive team and mentors who believed in my potential and encouraged me to embrace this opportunity.

However, as I became more intimately involved with the project, I realized that my role was not just about technical expertise but also about collaboration, communication, and adaptability. I had to learn to leverage my strengths and seek support where needed, building a network of experts and colleagues who shared my passion for advancing geoscience collections. This focus has been instrumental in overcoming challenges and driving the project forward, and I have learned many important lessons about the geoscience community and the power of collaboration along the way.

## Project Overview

We had a relatively short timeline to complete the project, with the following key milestones:

**Duration:** January 2023 - Q1 2025

### Phases of the Project

#### Phase 1 (Complete)**

The first phase involved gathering use cases, information models, and best practices. [Ben Norton](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5819-9134), who has extensive experience working with Specify as well as being a data scientist and curation specialist, spearheaded this effort. Ben did an excellent job collecting and evluating data models from various institutions, identifying commonalities and differences, and distilling this information into a series of comprehensive documents for our review. He was generous in his time and expertise, guiding us through the complexities of geological collections and helping us understand the unique challenges faced by the community. Regular meetings with him and our team provided the clarity and direction we needed to move forward.

I had the privilege of conducting interviews with geological curators and researchers, which provided invaluable insights into the challenges and needs of the community. This foundational work was crucial in shaping our approach.

#### Phase 2 (In Progress)

Currently, we are focused on the design and software engineering for GeoSpecify, with an exciting goal of releasing a production-ready version by Q1 2025. This phase has been particularly stimulating, as I’ve been involved in translating the insights from our initial phase into practical software solutions.

## Engaging with Field Experts

Throughout 2023 and early 2024, I connected with a diverse range of scientists and collections personnel from institutions globally. These interactions, both virtual and in-person, were incredibly enriching. I learned firsthand how different institutions manage their specimens and data, and their feedback has been instrumental in refining our models.

### Notable Institutions I Engaged With

- Mindat.org
- The University of Kansas
- Denver Museum of Nature and Science
- South Dakota School of Mines
- University of Texas at Austin
- California Academy of Sciences
- Natural History Museum Bern
- Smithsonian Institution
- ...and many others.

These meetings not only broadened my understanding of geological collections but also fostered a sense of community among professionals dedicated to advancing this field.

## The GeoSpecify Advisory Committee

To ensure we stay aligned with the needs of our users, we established the GeoSpecify Advisory Committee, comprising 40 experts from over 30 collections. This committee has been a vital resource, providing guidance and feedback throughout our journey.

### Key Topics Discussed

- **Introduction to GeoSpecify**
- **Unique Identifiers**
- **Geologic Age**
- **Using GeoSpecify**

These discussions have been enlightening, offering diverse perspectives that have shaped our project's direction.

## Insights on the Extended Data Model

One of the highlights of my involvement has been the development of an extended data model that supports enhanced age queries. This feature is crucial for geologists, allowing them to search for specimens based on relative and absolute ages. 

### Why Extended Age Queries Matter

The ability to query geological time periods using chronostrat names or numbers across various contexts significantly enhances usability. I’ve seen how this functionality can streamline searches and enrich the data available for geological research, making it easier for researchers to find relevant specimens.

In conclusion, my experience with the GeoSpecify initiative has been transformative. I’ve gained a deeper appreciation for the complexities of managing geological collections and the importance of collaboration in advancing our understanding of the geosciences. As we move towards our production release, I am excited about the impact this project will have on the community and look forward to continuing this journey.

For more detailed insights, check out our publication, **Extending Specify 7 for Geoscience Collections**, which outlines our efforts in depth and can be accessed [here](https://doi.org/10.3897/biss.8.141673).
